# Pan-disease blood protein profiles of rheumatic autoimmune diseases
Code for the manuscript: Pan-disease blood protein profiles of rheumatic autoimmune diseases

All functions are in the functions_panAI.R file, and analysis is run in main.R. The figures have a separate functions file, figs_AI.R which is run in figs.R. The analysis method is two-pronged, consisting of differential analysis (limma) and machine learning (glmnet lasso). which takes a list of diseases and returns a list of proteins that are associated with the diseases. The function uses Olink Explore PEA data. The data contains the proteins and the diseases they are associated with. Part of the larger Human Disease Blood Atlas project, as described in[ Álvez et al](https://www.science.org/doi/10.1126/science.adx2678). 

Abstract: Systemic autoimmune rheumatic diseases (SARDs) are a heterogeneous group of autoimmune conditions characterized by immune system dysregulation leading to chronic inflammation and tissue damage. The overlapping clinical manifestations make differential diagnosis challenging, highlighting the need for novel biomarkers to facilitate early diagnosis, stratification, and personalized treatment. Five SARDs including idiopathic inflammatory myopathies (n=210), rheumatoid arthritis (n=84), systemic sclerosis (n=100), Sjögren disease (n=99), and systemic lupus erythematosus (n=99), as well as healthy controls (n=400) and controls with acute infectious diseases (n=218) were selected for plasma protein profiling using Olink Explore 1536.  Proteins with known association to SARDs as well as novel associations were identified through differential abundance analysis and machine learning. This explorative cross-sectional study demonstrates the importance of a pan-disease approach to biomarker identification within and between the five SARDs. NPX  values from this study are available open-access through the Human Protein Atlas, facilitating further plasma-proteome research on autoimmune diseases.
